>> Good morning and welcome to Session 301
getting started with Mac OS X Development Tools.
I'm Todd Fernandez, and I manage the
engineering teams which create Apple's IDEs,
otherwise known as integrated development environments.
So it's early, let's get started
with a little audience participation.
How many of you are new to developing on Mac OS X?
Whew. Good, I came to the right room this morning.
Excellent.
Well, we in the development tools organization and
everyone at Apple, are really excited that you're here
with us this week and want to create great products
for and on the Mac and to help you get started,
we have a number of important objectives
today for this session.
The first is to introduce you to the breadth and depth of
our Apple Developer Tool Suite and as we do so to point
out the comparisons and contrasts with some of
the other tool suites which you may be familiar
with on the platforms you already work on.
We want to make sure that you understand what task
each tool is particularly well-suited for and, finally,
we know that conferences like these can be overwhelming
and it can be easy to end up spending time inefficiently,
you've made a big investment to be here this week, and I
want to help you make the most of it by providing guidance
on which sessions will be most useful to you.
So, we're -- we're all developers here, right?
Okay. We know what developers do; we edit our
source code; we search and read documentation;
we build our products; we test them, ideally.
For those of you who put bugs in your code, we debug them.
We analyze and tune their performance to
give our users the best experience possible.
We package them up and then we deliver them to our
adoring fans otherwise known as our customers
if we've done the testing and debugging part correctly.
So you already have a workflow and a set of tools that you
use to do these tasks already wherever you may be coming
from and whether your tools are platform
agnostic or tailored to a particular platform,
you already have a workflow and a set of
tools that you -- you work with every day.
Well, we have a great set of tools
on Mac OS X too, the Xcode tools.
And while they may be tailored to
creating native Mac applications,
they are also great at building
lots of other types of products.
So whatever it is that you like to
build, we have the tools for you.
So to get you oriented let's take a brief
high-level tour before we get into the details
to show you what -- just get you oriented.
This, in fact, is a stylized version of what
you might see if you install the Leopard preview
that you received yesterday in
the Developer Applications folder.
So let's start right at the top
with Xcode; our universal IDE.
This is where most of you will spend the majority of
your time editing source code, reading documentation,
building your products and debugging them.
Interface Builder is our interface design tool, and it
makes it really easy to build beautiful user interfaces
and connect them up to your source code implementation.
It also provides you a lot of guidance to make your user
interface match the Apple Human Interface Guidelines
so that your application looks great on the Mac.
Dashcode is another IDE that's
focused on widget development,
and it makes it really fun to build beautiful widgets.
It gives you all the user interface elements
and source codes snippets that you need
to get started, and it's also new in Leopard.
Xray is another great new tool that's new in Leopard
that is an analysis tool that allows you to --
it uses the kind of the concept of GarageBand to
allow you to assemble instruments and record data
on your program's performance along a timeline allowing you
to correlate all sorts of different types of information
about your program's behavior to
analyze and optimize its performance.
It also includes a UI recording feature that
allows you to playback over several times
with different instruments a particular scenario that
you're debugging, and we'll talk about it more later.
We also have a number of more specialized utilities
whether you're making your application more accessible
for those with disabilities.
Whether you're building a plug-in to take
advantage of our synchronization technology, iSync,
to synchronize your program's data files for your users
or debug it with Syncrospector whether you need
to build a custom package for your -- to
install your product with PackageMaker
or perhaps perform more prosaic programming tasks
like editing property lists with Property List Editor
or comparing two source files with FileMerge,
we have lots of great utilities to help you.
Next I'd like to talk a little bit about graphics
tools. Quartz Composer is a great tool that allows you
to create different types of motion
graphics for integration into all sorts
of different applications, and
we'll talk more about that later on.
OpenGL Shader Builder is a great tool for
building vertex and fragment programs for the GPU,
and we'll talk more about that later on as
well and Core Image Fun House allows you
to explore the Core Image Framework to make
your application's graphics look really great.
So moving on to performance tools
we've already talked about Xray.
We have a number of other great performance tools starting
with Shark which is more in the instruction level,
and we'll talk more about that more later as well.
I also want to highlight Quartz Debug
which among other things allows you
to set the user interface resolution
scaling factor to ensure
that your application looks great at higher resolutions.
I want to highlight ObjectAlloc and Sampler
which prior to Leopard were independent tools
but have now been incorporated into Xray so that you
can take advantage of their functionality, again,
in that integrated way and correlate
it with other types of data.
So that's our initial tour to kind of get
you oriented and to move on further I'm going
to ask Anders Bertelrud
to come up and talk about how
to use our Toolchain to build native Mac applications.
So, please welcome Anders.
( Applause )
>> Thank you, Todd.
Okay. Great so we're going to talk about
creating native application using Xcode.
As Todd mentioned Xcode is the central
development IDE hub on Mac OS X,
this is where you'll spend most of
your time doing Mac OS X development.
So what can you build with Xcode?
Well, native applications, what do I mean by
that that means Cocoa, Carbon applications,
applications designed specifically for Mac OS X
using the Aqua User Interface those kinds of things,
but Xcode is also great for open source projects.
If you saw the talk yesterday where the organizer was
showing there's a new feature in Xcode designed specifically
to work with open source projects that maybe have
a different build system than native Xcode one,
code bases that can be built for multiple platforms,
you may be bringing some of that over onto Mac OS X,
maybe putting an native interface on that and
using that open source as part of your project.
You can, of course, also build other
kinds of projects like kernel extensions.
You may be doing image unit plug-ins,
you might want to do a plug-in
for a specific application such as
Photoshop, those kinds of things.
You can do that with Mac OS X as well -- with Xcode as well.
We're going to focus on native applications just
take you through a workflow here and as I go
through the workflow I'm going to just show a
series of screen shots and describe what's going on,
and then we'll give you pointers to sessions
where you can go and see much more detail
about the particular topic that interests you.
So creating a new project in Xcode is pretty easy.
Xcode has a wide variety of project
templates to get you started.
You see here -- if you can read that, you see there's
a lot of different kinds of application templates.
The most common thing is to create a Macintosh application
that the user can double click and can run as a menu bar
but there's also all kinds of other
templates for whatever you want to do.
Maybe you want to create one of these little
preview plug-ins that were shown in the keynote
where you can actually see the contents of
your document right there in the finder.
There's all kinds of plug-ins.
So, when you create a new project, you see the Xcode Project
Window and as you can see it's already populated for you
with all kinds of information and,
in fact, it can -- it can -
you can build and run it as it is and get a standard
application and then, of course, you fill in your parts.
So I just want to take you through the contents of the
Project Window here, there's obviously source code files.
We list those that's regular Objective-C or C
any -- any language that you have compiled for.
User interface files as Todd mentioned we have a great
tool called Interface Builder that allows you to create UI
for your application; we'll talk about that in a minute.
But those files are included in an Xcode project so Xcode
project references all those and organizes them together.
There's also Data Model Files so just
like your user interface is a structure
of UI elements, we have data modeled files as well.
I'll show that in a minute also there are other
resource files, in this case we see a couple
of string files a couple of other localized files.
Mac OS X has great localization features so you can
very easily take all of your human readable strings
and other UI elements and localize them
into a variety of different languages.
It's all dynamics so your one application package
can contain many, many different localizations
and then the users can switch on the fly and, in fact,
different users on the same machine
can choose to see different languages.
So you can have all these other resources in
various localizations in your Xcode project.
So those are the building blocks, the parts, from
which you build your project, your application
or plug-in whatever it is and targets are the instructions.
It's like these -- this furniture that comes in
the package, right, you have all the various parts
and then you have the big sheet that labels
everything and says how to put everything together.
In Xcode those are the targets, in an open
source project that might be a Makefile
or an Ant file if you're doing Java development.
So in our case it's the targets that contain all
the instructions and the little details about how
to put all these pieces together and Xcode also
let's you define execution environments for your --
your app and what do I mean by that, well,
there's various ways you can run your program.
You might want to run with certain debug settings.
You might want to run it with a certain
performance tool or you might want to set it
up to open some test documents automatically,
so you can set up a bunch of those in an Xcode
and very quickly test your app in various scenarios.
So, for more about the details of this, we have a
great session called Getting Started with Xcode
and that's actually in this room
right after this session so...
So one of the most common things you would do in
Xcode besides organizing all the input files is
to actually edit your source code because that's
what contains all your custom logic for --
for the app and as you might have seen yesterday we have
a great embedded Source Editor that's very powerful
and also contains a lot of features to let you focus
on the code sort of eyes on the code principle.
So as you see here there's a warning message that's
shown in yellow here that's shown right below the line
that has the warning there's also in this case
we see a debugging tool tip that shows you --
not only shows you the value but you can actually edit
the value, evaluate expressions, those kinds of things
and you can set break points right there
in the gutter, what we call the gutter,
and you can also enable various other
features, the line numbers, all kinds of things.
For more about the new sort of editor-centric development
workflow in Xcode 3.0, we have another session on that,
that's 305, session 305 that's tomorrow in the Presidio.
I mention Interface Builder, you edit
through logic in the Source Code Editor
but you use the separate Interface Builder tool
which is very tightly integrated with Xcode
so you might have seen a demo yesterday
where a simple context click can open
up a corresponding interface file in the Interface Builder.
Interface Builder works a little bit differently from some
of the tools on other -- other platforms that generate code.
Interface Builder does not generate code for your UI.
It actually keeps a rich, well-connected representation
of your user interface elements and the connections
between them and this is great over time because it's
a lot more maintainable then generating a bunch of code
that you then have to understand and modify.
So it's actually an object archive of your UI
elements and of the connections between them
and something called bindings which is
a connection between the UI elements
and the fundamental properties
of the objects in your program.
There's a session on Interface Builder tomorrow
in the Mission Room, and they'll be showing some
of the great features of the new Interface
Builder in Xcode 3.0 which includes the library --
parts library and also very good Aqua guides for
creating really high quality Aqua User Interfaces.
So similar to how we have a hierarchy of User Interface
Elements that are well connected and editable over time,
Xcode also has a Data Model Editor that actually
does the same thing really for your objects,
your -- for your fundamental object graph.
So these are the objects that are underneath
your UI that represent your actual data set.
So, if you're doing an address book application, you
might imagine you have a person, records, you have groups,
you have these kinds of objects and you can code all that by
hand, but it's a lot easier to lay that out and to develop
that as a connected graph of objects and
classes and here again Xcode maintains this
as a strongly connected representation and uses Core Data
underneath the hood to let you do a lot of these things
without actually writing any code
so that's a great timesaver.
There's a session on that too, Core Data
session which would be actually today
It's following this session in a
different room in the Russian Hill --
hard to go to both, so part of this session is to help you
choose which is going to be the most appropriate for you
and make sure you're seeing the
right -- the right presentations.
So we've taken a look at a couple of different
screen shots in terms of workflow for using Xcode
to build the native app what we've done here -- well, part
of what we're doing is to use Code and User Interface
and Data Model Editors together and the language the
primary language, Objective-C, is a very dynamic language
and the frameworks and tools take great
advantage of that and actually --
you can actually use Ruby or Python or
some of the other scripting languages
which are also very dynamic to do the coding part.
So there's dynamism in the Cocoa frameworks,
there's dynamism in the language and the tools
and there is a common paradigms used throughout the
stack and one of those is Model-View-Controller that many
of you may be familiar with and that's where you quite
simply separate out your Data Model which has nothing to do
with your user interface and then you have your view
layer up at the top which is edited with Interface Builder
and then in between those are the controller layer.
One of the great things about Mac OS X is
that there is technology called bindings
which let's you really drastically reduce the amount
of code you write for the controller layer so that,
if you want a button to enable or disable
based on the state of some model object,
you can easily do that in Interface
Builder, just set-up the connection.
You don't write a single line of code
the properties of the UI elements will --
will take their values from the corresponding properties in
the model and vice versa so that, when you enter something
in the UI, it automatically affects the model.
There's also integration with Core Data which is
this great technology for building up your data model.
So the tools and the frameworks and the language
all fit together and this is a bit similar to some
of the other platforms you may be familiar
with Visual Studio and C Sharp and .NET
where those three things kind of work together.
On Mac OS X we have the same thing Xcode, Cocoa and
Objective-C, but it's very dynamic and it really --
it really let's you kind of shift into
another gear in terms of development.
So one of the examples of the integration
here is the refactoring feature in Xcode.
It's actually new in 3.0 so let's take a look at that --
oh, I should say, yes there's a session on getting started
with Cocoa Bindings that's going to be later on
today, not at the same time as the 10:30 one.
So refactoring what is that, well, refactoring
in general is to make whole program modifications
to your code while preserving the semantics and
Xcode let's you do that you can, for example,
extract a little piece of a function or a method
into another one, you can rename something
across your whole program and preserve the semantics.
We actually go a little bit beyond that too you might
have heard the Objective-C 2.0 which is new in Leopard.
It's garbage collected, it has iterate
support for iteration those kinds of things.
It's a newer edition of the language that you can opt in to.
In addition to the refactoring operations
that preserve the semantics entirely,
we also let you do whole program transformations that
may go beyond that and modify the semantics to something
that you want, to make it garbage collected, for example.
So we have refactoring operations to adopt
some of the Objective C-2.0 paradigms.
In this case we see an example of the integration, this
is an example of doing a simple rename refactoring,
but you notice that not only the source code is being named
but also the nib files, these Interface Builder files.
So Xcode can index and it knows about your Data Model
Files, and it knows about your UI files and then,
when you make changes, it goes across all those
and make, make the changes correspondingly.
So here we see the difference here in terms of the
structure of a UI element file the Interface Builder File
and that it's kind of reached in there and
modified the -- modified the attributes.
You'll notice there's a checkbox here.
I don't know if you can read it
in the back; it says snapshot
and what this is is whenever you make a whole program
transformation, you probably want to take a snapshot
of the state of your project so this means
that if you decide later that you did something
that you didn't really want you can rollback to that and
that will be talked about more, refactoring and snapshots,
in the special session on that and that is
actually on Thursday in the Presidio Session 312,
all of these are listed in your schedule as well.
So, once I've taken a snapshot and I've decided
that it wasn't such a good idea to rename it,
I can actually restore from a snapshot and these snapshots
just stay around and you can decide when you want
to delete them but by default they just kind of build
up a history of the different states that you moved
through in your project, and it makes it very easy
to see what changes you made even to Data Model Files
and UI Element files not just your source code and you
can easily roll back or just restore a particular change.
So those are all about editing and modifying
the parts that go into your project.
Talked about targets that are the
blueprints that are these instruction sheets
for how Xcode should actually assemble
all these things together.
So a target consists of a variety of different parts itself.
It's very flexible.
You can use a target to copy headers.
You would do that, for example, into a framework.
A framework on Mac OS X contains both a code and resources
and the APIs in terms of headers that are accessible.
There's obviously resource files, you may have
something like a framework that has UI functionality
and it may have Interface Builder files in and of itself in
there or actually Core Data model files might be in there.
There's a facility you can run,
actually, an arbitrary script.
You can run Shell scripts, Ruby scripts any of those kinds
of things as part of your build, this can be very powerful
because it gives you hooks such that you can
evoke even an entire rebuild system if you want to
but more commonly people will just run some custom tool.
You can even set-up your projects so that
one of your targets builds a custom tool
that converts let's say an image into some custom format
and then a later target can actually evoke that tool
and then perform that transformation
on the resources for your application.
So very powerful and something that really, really
let's you do almost anything as part of the build.
There's obviously the code that's in your projects most
-- most interesting projects contain some custom logic,
so Xcode will compile and link that code for you and
there is like the project template there is a variety
of different target templates for you to choose from all the
way from Carbon and Cocoa, UI stuff even if you just want
to create a command line tool you can easily
do that with the starting point templates.
There's another session called 311 about the
Xcode build system and that one is on Wednesday.
And there they're going into a lot more
detail about how to customize the build system.
So you've edited all your files; you've built your
project and then, of course, you want to run and debug
and Xcodes' debugging is pretty powerful.
You have a debugger window that you can just really
immerse yourself in if you want to but in general we want
to keep the eyes on the code. This screen shot shows
the debugging window that you might not have seen
in the previous sessions typical thing with the stack
trace and showing the various variables, of course,
you can evaluate expressions on the fly you can
modify expressions, modify the value variables.
You can actually drag the program counter back
in time and rerun a piece of code over again
after you've modified a value those kinds of things that
can really help you -- help you figure out what's going on.
( Inaudible audience question )
There's some support for that.
I think it's probably best to go to the debugging
session and ask that question -- oh, sorry.
In general, if we could ask the
questions at the end, that would be great.
We're actually going to have a Q&A session at the end of
this, so we will -- we'll remention that question then.
Unit testing is a pretty powerful thing that's in Xcode
and the idea here is that your software is composed
of various components that can be tested in isolation.
So you may have a little tool box or you may even
have just a class with some kind of data structure
where you can test it outside of its use in your
app and what you can do in Xcode is set up Unit tests
for that component and there are several benefits to this.
One of the benefits obviously is that it helps you develop
your API and make sure that that component is well designed
but also over time as you optimize or make changes
to the component it actually helps you make sure
you didn't change your semantics inadvertently,
and you can easily set-up Xcode to run all of
these unit tests whenever you build your project.
And this is great, this example shows, for example, that I
just intentionally in this case introduced a semantic change
in one of my components and because these unit tests are all
run all the time, if you choose, you can easily see as soon
as you made that change and then you can debug that and
step into it and see what caused the change maybe you tried
to optimize something but you forgot about some edge case. So
in summary about Xcode we have tools; we have the language;
and the frameworks that work very well together, Xcode,
Cocoa, Objective-C are the tools framework and language,
and they're really designed together to make you more
productive and all of them are improved in Leopard.
So you've built your app.
You're running it; maybe now you've debugged it, tested it,
and now it works well but maybe it's running a bit slow,
maybe it's using too much memory, so
like Xcode is the hub for development,
Xray is really the first starting point for analysis.
So what is Xray, what can it help you analyze?
Well, obviously memory usage that's the big thing.
It's often related to the performance
because, if you use lots and lots of memory,
your machine is probably going to slow to a crawl.
CPU performance if you are doing
numeric calculations just raw --
raw performance there but there's all kinds of
other stuff maybe you're interested in, you know,
why is this file being opened 10
times, what in my code is doing that.
There's network activity and specialized
graphics calls and really
with Xray almost any behavior of
the application can be analyzed.
There are great starting point templates,
you might have seen this panel before.
This is what you see when you first launch
Xray and you can start with either one
of those commonly encountered analysis templates or you
can start with a blank one and drag in your own instruments
from the part library. Just a quick overview
of the Xray window as you can guess I'm going
to refer you to an Xray session here for the details.
But the basic idea is that it is a collection of instruments
and you can add as many of those as you want and then,
once you've collected data, all these data streams are
collected together so that you can correlate them over time
and that's a really powerful thing so, once you've
done that, you can see your data in various ways,
there's all kinds of options that
are based on the selected instrument.
There is a list of trace events for the selected instrument
for a sampling instrument this would be, you know,
what was the stack at any given time; for an
allocation instrument; it might be well what --
what's the actual object allocation so that's the detail
there at the bottom for the instrument you have selected
and there's an extended detail of you that usually shows
you the stack trace of an extended selected trace event
so you can see exactly where any
given block of memory was allocated
where a particular file was open, those kinds of things.
There is another session on Xray.
It's in the Presidio on Wednesday and that's a
great session that will really give you introduction
to how -- how to use the power of Xray.
So one of the powerful things about Xray that is
kind of new is the ability to add an arbitrary set
of instruments and collect all these things over time.
Very often you'll find -- you'll be running
your tests and then discover that, well,
now I understand that it's doing a certain thing
but now I need to add another instrument to know why
and what you can do is you can develop your own
templates, if you want to, you can customize
and save off your own templates and in particular what's
really useful is you can actually add one instrument
that records the UI actions that you performed and you can
play those back and this is great for when you say, well,
let me see what the CPU is doing
and then you discover, well, okay,
now I know what the CPU was doing but
was I opening any files at the time.
You can just go back and add that
instrument in and then rerun your test
and Xray will rerun exactly the same UI actions that
you performed and you can see exactly what's going
on with this other instrument -- really powerful.
So once you have your data you, of
course, want to see what's going on there.
You can narrow down the scope onto just the
timeline that you want to see and, of course,
one of the interesting things is
to see it what line of code --
of my code was causing this, so as you may have
seen of the demo yesterday you can go directly
from a back trace back to the line of source code in Xcode.
So in summary it's really a way to gather all these
different tools that Apple has had for a long time
for analyzing your program's behavior; do it in a nice
intuitive user interface based on the GarageBand metaphor
and to be able to capture data streams and those kinds
of things and it's compatible with lower level tools
like Sample, these old -- older
tools Xray can open those traces
and really show you everything in one unified front end.
So we've seen just a brief overview of what it looks like
to create a native application and to analyze it using Xcode
and Todd's going to come back on stage and
show you what else you can build with Xcode.
( Applause )
>> So buckle your seatbelts, we're going to continue on
with kind of a whirlwind tour of a sampling of the variety
of other types of products and other types of tasks you
can perform with the -- the diversity of tools on Mac OS X;
first starting with what else can Xcode build?
This is obviously in order of importance but you can
build screen saver plug-ins and integrate great content
that you create using Quartz Composer which, again,
I'll talk a little bit more about in a moment
and there's a Quartz Composer session about how to use
it to design your motion graphics tomorrow morning.
Next project particularly dear to my heart,
Automator Actions for those of you not aware
of Automator it's a great end user level automation tool and
what we have seen is that, if you build a well-designed set
of Automator actions for your application, you can expose
its power and it's functionality to a much wider audience
and sell more copies of your software and, if you make it
really easy for your customers to integrate your application
into an automated workflow, they're
going to be loyal customers.
They will not want to go back to doing that task by hand
and there's a great hands-on session tomorrow morning.
It's a popular time on how to build Automator actions.
Something else really fun, games: Mac OS X includes
industry standards frameworks like OpenGL, OpenAL,
GLUT that makes it easy to bring your platform agnostic code
over to Mac OS X and put a beautiful Cocoa user interface
on top of it, and we have sessions on bringing your OpenGL
Code over to Mac OS X. What else can we build, well,
perhaps the polar opposite of games, if you need to
build I/O Kit Drivers or other types of kernel extensions,
Xcode makes it easy to do that as well and, if
you need to know how to do this or already know
and just need some additional tips and tricks, we have a
session immediately following this one on kernel debugging.
So one of the things that Anders has mentioned
several times already is that particularly
in Leopard this has been possible before but
there's a lot of great new functionality in Leopard
that makes it much easier to build native Mac OS X
applications using your scripting language of choice.
Historically you've been able to do that with
our own scripting language, AppleScript,
but we have also bundled the bridges that you need
to build your applications using Python or Ruby
and that's all really easy to do in
Xcode as well, support syntax coloring
and the other important editor features right in Xcode
for those languages and there's an entire session
on that Thursday morning on how to develop
Cocoa applications using Python and Ruby.
Moving along on our whirlwind tour, again,
Anders mentioned open source projects earlier
and there's a great new Xcode feature called the Organizer
which you may have seen in yesterday's developer tools State
of the Union session that makes it really
easy to bring over projects that don't use --
that aren't Xcode projects and use
other build systems like Make or Autocom
for Ant. The Organizer makes it really
easy to just drag those projects in.
It will automatically detect that your
project uses one of those build systems
and set-up the build, clean and run buttons for you.
You can also integrate all sorts of other type of scripting
into the action menu and customize your -- your --
the Organizer to your heart's content so it builds and works
just the way you like it, and there's a complete session
on that, hands-on, so you can follow along
with the presenter on Thursday afternoon.
So, that's, again, a whirlwind tour of other
types of products that you can build with Xcode.
Let's look at some of the other tools
that we have for other types of projects.
So I just refer to the Organizer and the fact that it can --
it supports the Ant Build System which makes it really easy
to work with Java Projects and Mac OS X is
a really great Java development platform.
How do I know that because we see the seeds of
MacBook Pros in Java conferences and we have a number
of sessions this week about bringing your
Java applications to Mac OS X Leopard.
So perhaps a diversion -- so how many out there think that
this whole GUI thing is a fad and it's not going to last,
prefer to just be working with vi and Emacs in a terminal?
I -- I sympathize, and we have tools for you as well,
both specialized tools like Xcode Build which allows you
to build your Xcode project at the command line and Xed
which is a great new tool in Leopard which allows you
to open up the Xcode Editor from the command
line and integrate Xcode into your --
allow you to script these tools and interact with them
from terminal, plus we have the other command line tools
that you'd expect on any Linux -- oh, Linux,
UNIX platform, wow, including our Compiler GCC
and the other tools you might expect and for those of you
who don't know what these tools are, you don't need to,
the GUI tools will take care of it for you but those of
you who do love these tools, they're there for your use
and there's a session on compiler advances that we've made
in GCC for our purposes on the Mac on Thursday afternoon.
So we've mentioned Shark earlier. Xray is a
great new performance analysis tool on Leopard,
Shark has been around later -- ah, longer
but it has a great new version in Leopard,
and it focuses more on instruction level analysis.
It is great at helping you find hot
spots and highly optimized algorithms.
You can use it to take profiles of your
application or the entire system to see what kinds
of interactions are taking place between your
application and all the other processes on the system
and this can be great for tackling all
sorts of problems like those that are listed
on the slide which I'm not going to read to you.
Some of you may have encountered these problems before
and Shark is a really great tool
for helping you solve them.
This is a screen shot of a Shark time profile of one
particular application and you can take similar profiles of,
again, the entire system that tell you exactly
where the time is being spent. And there's a session
on Thursday afternoon about getting started
using Shark to analyze and optimize your code.
So, again, let's drop back to the terminal, we have a
number of analysis tools that are also accessible, again,
including specialized tools that are specific to the
Mac like a command line tool for Xray that allows you
to take the data which you can then later analyze using the
GUI, DTrace which is great open source technology that many
of the Xray instruments rely on you can also,
of course, access from the command line;
Sample is a great tool for sampling a performance of your
application periodically pausing it every ten milliseconds
and finding out where it's spending its time but
Sample, again, has been also incorporated in Xray.
Shark we have a command line tool to take the Shark Profiles
which you can then later analyze with the GUI and a number
of other tools that you -- many of which you will
find familiar from other UNIX platforms to look
at in various ways at how your
program is using memory use --
using memory and how you can optimize it to give
your users a better experience with your application
And we have a session on using DTrace which,
again, will be great for those of you who --
not these newfangled GUI's on Thursday afternoon.
So how many of you are familiar
with installing your application
on other platforms, how many of you have dealt with that?
Installation is lot similar -- simpler on Mac OS X. In
many cases it can be as easy as building a disc image
with your application bundle and
just allowing your users to drag it
over into their applications folder. That's it. The bundle
technology on Mac OS X allows you to include all kinds
of associated data that the operating system can then
find in the bundle like document icons and other kinds
of associations so that the operating system
shows that it knows your application is there
without you having to do anything with registry keys.
The operating system takes care of that for you but,
of course, if you have more complex installation needs,
we have a great tool called PackageMaker which allows
you to build custom installers that allow you to do pre
and postinstallation scripts and all the other
bells and whistles that you might need if you need
to install other things on the system and this is just a --
a look at it; allows you to graphically lay out
your welcome screen and provide the look you want;
your license agreement whatever else you need in
your custom installer and then there's a session
on that later this afternoon in this very room.
So continuing on with our tour we've
referenced Quartz Composer several times.
It's a great tool for designing motion graphics which you
might not think about but can really be quite powerful
in a lot of different types of applications,
not just screen savers as I mentioned before.
Quartz Composers animations are actually used in a wide
variety of applications on Mac OS X from iTunes to Dashcode
to screen savers and you might find it very interesting
to add some more visual pizzazz to your application
so I encourage you to come out to one of the sessions to
find out what you can do with Quartz Composer tomorrow
and Thursday, again, in this very room another very
interesting graphics app is OpenGL Shader Builder
which I mentioned earlier, and it's a dedicated tool that
allows you to build your vertex and fragment GPU programs
for OpenGL and test and debug them. And there's a great
session on tuning your application on Thursday morning,
which brings me to Dashcode, another
project particularly near
and dear to my heart which you
may have seen shown yesterday.
It's an IDE focussed on building widgets
which are a lot of fun and it makes --
Dashcode makes building widgets really fun.
You can start off with a variety of templates.
You can see that we have a similar concept in
many of our development tools from Xray, to Xcode,
to Dashcode where we provide you rich
starting points to get you going.
You can create all sorts of different
types of widgets, edit them graphically,
we have the DOM there on the left navigator to make it easy
to select different portions of your widget's interface,
steps which actually lead you through
the whole process of building a widget.
The parts library, again, similar to Interface Builder
and Xray where we have a library that allows you to drag
in instruments in Xray or different user interface
elements here in Dashcode as well as Interface Builder
and an Inspector to customize those parts to look
just the way -- look and behave just the way you want them to.
It also has an integrated editor which makes it very easy
to edit your JavaScript CSS and
HTML source that makes your widget.
There it is and it is very similar to the editor in Xcode.
It gives you the same syntax coloring and
code completion that you would expect.
We also have a Files View which allows you to manage
the files that make up your widget and, again,
in the library we have also reasonable code
snippets, little pieces of JavaScript code that --
for common tasks that you might
need to implement your widget,
and finally we have an integrated JavaScript debugger
as well with the controls you'd expect to step
through your code, examine the variables and the stack
frame and easily see your running widget as you're stepping
through your code and debugging it, and we have a great
session -- I know because I've been in the rehearsals --
tomorrow afternoon in this very room, popular room, and I
hope to see you there and that concludes our whirlwind tour
of tools on Mac OS X. But let's refresh our memory, again,
to keep us all oriented, so again Xcode is our universal IDE
where you're going to spend the bulk of your time for
most products; Interface Builder where you're going
to build your user interfaces for your products;
Dashcode where you can build a great widget
that can help promote your products and give your users
a really quick experience if you to enter some data
for your particular application; Xray is a
great new application makes it really easy
and fun to analyze your programs's behavior
and find performance and memory usage problems.
These are our tools, again, this is what you'll see when
you install the Leopard preview that you received yesterday
which I'll highlight right there on the DVD, you
can open up the installer and install the tools.
One of the great things about Mac OS X is that each
release includes the latest and greatest tools,
tools aren't an afterthought, they're part of every release
of Mac OS X but what about in between releasees? Well,
we often have tools releases in between OS
releases and you can easily down load them
from the ADC web site at developer.apple.com/tools.
So to sum up, again, as Anders mentioned earlier Xray is
really the hub of the development experience on Mac OS X,
but Mac OS X also has all the other tools you need
for specialized purposes and other types of products.
We encourage you to use our powerful analysis tools
to polish your software and make it run really great
on the Mac, and please take advantage of the many
detailed sessions; those we've highlighted today
and there are many others as well that we didn't
have time to point out and have a great conference.
We're really happy to see you here and we look forward
to what you build with our tools, go out and amaze us.
Matthew Formica is our evangelist and, if you have any
questions about tools, he's a great contact and, in fact,
he'll be giving the Getting Started with
Xcode session immediately following this one.